README – Date Functions & Monthly Business Analysis Project
 Project Title
Monthly Business Analysis Using Date Functions in SQL

   Project Objective
This project focuses on analyzing business data using SQL date functions.
The main goal is to understand:
Monthly order volume
Monthly revenue
Revenue trends
Month-to-month growth
Delivery performance
Risk detection based on growth patterns
All analysis is done using date-based aggregation and business logic calculations.

 Business Problms Solved
   1 Orders Per Month
We analyzed how many orders were received each month using:
date_trunc('month', order_date)
COUNT(*)
GROUP BY
This helps identify seasonality patterns and business activity levels.
   2 Monthly Revenue Calculation
Revenue formula used:
(price × quantity) − discount
Key concepts:
SUM()
COALESCE(discount, 0)
Monthly grouping
This allows the finance team to understand total income per month.
   3 Handling NULL Dates
Some records had missing order_date.
Using:
COALESCE(date_trunc(...), 'pending')
We categorized missing dates as "pending" to maintain data transparency.
This is important in BI because ignoring NULL values can distort results.
   4 Revenue Trend Analysis
We calculated revenue per month and sorted chronologically to observe:
Growth
Decline
Stability
This helps management understand business direction.
   5 Delivery Time Analysis
Business Logic:
Delivery Time = shipped_date − order_date
Steps:
Subtract dates
Convert interval to seconds using extract(epoch)
Convert seconds to days (divide by 86400)
Use AVG() to calculate monthly average delivery time
This analysis supports operational efficiency monitoring.
   6 Month-to-Month Growth Analysis
Using advanced window functions:
LAG() to get previous month revenue
Revenue difference calculation
CASE WHEN for growth/decline classification
This provides direct insight into performance comparison.
    7 Risk Detection Model (Advanced Challenge)
We combined:
CTE (WITH)
Monthly aggregation
LAG() and LEAD()
Growth percentage formula
ROUND()
Risk classification logic
Risk condition:
If monthly growth > 20% → High Risk
Else → Normal
Business reasoning:
Rapid growth may cause operational stress and delayed shipments.
This challenge integrates time trends, historical comparison, and predictive thinking.

    SQL Conepts Practiced
date_trunc()
Date subtraction
extract(epoch)
COUNT()
SUM()
AVG()
GROUP BY
ORDER By
COALESCE
CASE WHEN
ROUND()
LAG()
LEAD()
CTE (WITH)

   Key Business Insights
Identified peak and low sales months
Measured revenue performance monthly
Detected growth and decline patterns
Measured operational delivery efficiency
Built a simple risk detection model
This project moves beyond basic queries and applies real business reasoning.

    Learning Outcome
From this project, I strengthened:
Practical use of date functions in BI analysis
Handling real-world data issues (NULL values)
Writing structured analytical queries
Using window functions for trend comparison
Applying business logic inside SQL
This project reflects intermediate-level Business Intelligence skills focused on time-based analysis.

    Conclusion
This project demonstrates how date functions are essential in Business Intelligence.
Monthly analysis is a core requirement in real companies because most business reporting is time-based.
By combining aggregation, window functions, and business logic, I was able to simulate real finance and operations reporting scenarios.